src/assets/scaffold/jules/README.md, before:

# .jules/

The `.jules/` directory is a structured workspace for scheduled agents and human execution.
It captures **observations as events** and **actionable work as issues** within the exchange.

This file is human-oriented. Agents must read `.jules/JULES.md` for the formal contract.

## Scope (What this README defines)

- `.jules/` defines **artifacts and contracts** (events/issues, role state, schemas).
- **Execution + git + PR operations are out of scope here.**
  When you are reading this inside the VM, you already have the execution environment;
  follow the role contract and produce the required artifacts/changes.
- `jlo` is **scaffold + prompt/config management only**.
  It does **not** run agents, orchestrate schedules, create PRs, or manage merges.

## Document Hierarchy

| Document | Audience | Contains |
|----------|----------|----------|
| `.jules/JULES.md` | Jules agents | Jules-specific contracts and schemas |
| `.jules/README.md` | Humans | This guide |

**Rule**: Jules-internal details stay in `.jules/`.

## Role Flow

```
Narrator -> Observer -> Decider -> [Planner] -> Implementer
(changes)   (events)    (issues)   (expand)     (code changes)
```

| Role Type | Role(s) | Transformation |
|-----------|---------|----------------|
| Narrator | `.jules/roles/narrator/` | Git history -> Changes summary |
| Observer | directories under `.jlo/roles/observers/` | Source -> Events (domain-specialized observations) |
| Decider | `.jlo/roles/deciders/role.yml` | Events -> Issues (validation + consolidation) |
| Planner | (Single-role; no `.jlo/` role definitions) | Issues -> Expanded Issues (deep analysis, optional) |
| Implementer | (Single-role; no `.jlo/` role definitions) | Issues -> Code changes |

**Execution**: Roles are invoked by GitHub Actions using `jlo run` and workflow dispatch workflows.

**Configuration Language**: All YAML files are written in English for optimal LLM processing.

## Branch Strategy

| Agent Type | Starting Branch | Output Branch | Auto-merge |
|------------|-----------------|---------------|------------|
| Narrator | `jules` | `jules-narrator-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Observer | `jules` | `jules-observer-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Decider | `jules` | `jules-decider-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Planner | `jules` | `jules-planner-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Implementer | `main` | `jules-implementer-*` | ❌ (human review) |

Narrator, Observers, Deciders, and Planners modify only `.jules/` and auto-merge after CI passes.
Implementers modify source code and require human review.

## Directory Structure

```
.jules/
+-- README.md           # This file (jlo-managed)
+-- JULES.md            # Agent contract (jlo-managed)
+-- .jlo-version        # Version marker (jlo-managed)
+-- github-labels.json  # GitHub labels definition
|
+-- exchange/           # Exchange container
|   +-- changes.yml     # Narrator output (bounded changes summary)
|   +-- events/         # Raw observations
|   |   +-- <state>/
|   |       +-- *.yml
|   +-- issues/         # Consolidated problems
|   |   +-- <label>/
|   +-- innovators/     # Innovator state persistence
|       +-- <persona>/  # Persona-specific workstation
|           +-- perspective.yml   # Innovator continuity
|           +-- proposal.yml      # Current proposal draft
|
+-- workstations/       # Observer state persistence
|   +-- <role>/         # Role-specific workstation
|       +-- perspective.yml   # Observer continuity (goals/rules/ignore/log)
|
+-- roles/              # Role definitions (global)
    +-- narrator/       # Single-role layer
    |   +-- narrator_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Layer contract
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   |   +-- bootstrap_summary.yml
    |   |   +-- overwrite_summary.yml
    |   +-- schemas/
    |       +-- changes.yml   # Schema template for changes.yml
    |
    +-- observers/      # Multi-role layer
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared observer contract
    |   +-- observers_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   |   +-- bridge_comments.yml
    |   +-- schemas/
    |   |   +-- event.yml    # Event template
    |
    +-- deciders/       # Multi-role layer
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared decider contract
    |   +-- decider_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   +-- schemas/
    |   |   +-- issue.yml    # Issue template
    |
    +-- planners/       # Single-role layer (issue-driven)
    |   +-- planner_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared planner contract
    |   +-- tasks/
    |
    +-- implementers/   # Single-role layer (issue-driven)
    |   +-- implementer_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared implementer contract
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   |   +-- bugs.yml
    |   |   +-- docs.yml
    |   |   +-- feats.yml
    |   |   +-- refacts.yml
    |   |   +-- tests.yml
    |
    +-- innovators/     # Multi-role layer (phase-driven)
        +-- innovators_prompt.j2      # Prompt construction (uses {{phase}})
        +-- contracts.yml             # Layer contract
        +-- tasks/
        |   +-- create_idea.yml       # Creation phase task
        |   +-- refine_proposal.yml   # Refinement phase task
        +-- schemas/
        |   +-- perspective.yml
        |   +-- idea.yml
        |   +-- proposal.yml
        |   +-- comment.yml
        +-- roles/
            +-- <persona>/
                +-- role.yml
|
+-- setup/
    +-- tools.yml       # Tool selection
    +-- env.toml        # Environment variables (generated/merged)
    +-- install.sh      # Installation script (generated)
    +-- .gitignore      # Ignores env.toml
```

## Layer Architecture

| Layer | Type | Invocation |
|-------|------|------------|
| Narrator | Single-role | `jlo run narrator` |
| Observers | Multi-role | `jlo run observers --role <role>` |
| Deciders | Single-role | `jlo run deciders` |
| Planners | Single-role | `jlo run planners <path>` |
| Implementers | Single-role | `jlo run implementers <path>` |

**Narrator**: Produces `.jules/exchange/changes.yml` summarizing recent codebase changes. Runs first, before observers.

**Multi-role layers** (Observers, Innovators): Roles are scheduled via `.jlo/scheduled.toml`. Each role has its own subdirectory with `role.yml` in `.jlo/roles/`. Custom roles are authored with `jlo create <layer> <name>`, while built-in roles are installed with `jlo add <layer> <role>`.

**Single-role layers** (Deciders, Planners, Implementers): Have a fixed role with `contracts.yml` directly in the layer directory. Planners and Implementers are issue-driven and require an issue file path argument. Template creation is not supported.

**Innovators**: Phase-driven execution (`--phase creation` or `--phase refinement`). Each phase uses a dedicated task file (`tasks/create_idea.yml` / `tasks/refine_proposal.yml`) injected at runtime via the `task` context variable. Universal constraints are in `contracts.yml`.

## Exchange
 
 The exchange is a flat directory structure for events and issues.
 
 - Events and issues are global to the repository.
 - `roles/` remains global.
 - Observers and deciders operate on the single `exchange/` directory.
 - Event state directories are defined by the scaffold templates.

## Configuration Files

### contracts.yml
Layer-level shared constraints. All roles in the layer reference this file.

### <layer>_prompt.j2
Defines a prompt template that assembles required and optional includes into a single prompt sent to the agent.

### role.yml
Specialized focus for observers, deciders, and innovators. Continuity lives in the workstation perspective file.

### Templates (*.yml)
Copyable templates (changes.yml, event.yml, issue.yml) defining the structure of artifacts.
Agents `cp` these files and fill them out.

## Workflow

### 0. Narrator Agent (Scheduled, runs first)

Narrator summarizes codebase changes for observer context:
1. Reads `.jules/roles/narrator/schemas/changes.yml` for schema
2. Determines commit range (previous `to_commit` or bootstrap)
3. Collects commits and changed paths (excluding `.jules/`)
4. Writes `.jules/exchange/changes.yml`

If no non-excluded changes exist, Narrator exits without creating a session.

### 1. Observer Agents (Scheduled)

Each observer:
1. Reads contracts.yml (layer behavior)
2. Reads `.jules/exchange/changes.yml` for recent changes context (if present)
3. Reads role.yml (specialized focus)
4. Reads `.jules/workstations/<role>/perspective.yml`
5. **Skips observations already covered by open issues (deduplication)**
6. Writes event files under exchange/events/ in the incoming state directory
7. Updates perspective.yml (goals/rules/ignore/log)
8. Publishes changes as a PR (branch naming follows the convention below)


### 2. Decider Agent (Scheduled)

Triage agent:
1. Reads contracts.yml (layer behavior)
2. Reads all event files in the incoming state directory
3. Validates observations (do they exist in codebase?)
4. Merges related events sharing root cause
5. **Merges events into existing issues when related (updates content)**
6. Creates new issues for genuinely new problems (using id as filename, placing in label directory)
7. **When deep analysis is needed, provides clear rationale in deep_analysis_reason**
8. Moves processed events to the processed state directory defined by the scaffold

**Decider answers**: "Is this real? Should these events merge into one issue?"

### 3. Planner Agent (On-Demand)

Specifier agent (runs only for `requires_deep_analysis: true`):
1. Reads contracts.yml (layer behavior)
2. Reads target issue from exchange/issues/<label>/
3. **Reviews deep_analysis_reason to understand scope**
4. Analyzes full system impact and dependency tree
5. Expands issue with detailed analysis (affected_areas, constraints, risks)
6. Sets requires_deep_analysis to false
7. **Preserves and expands the original rationale with findings**
8. Overwrites the issue file

**Planner answers**: "What is the full scope of this issue?"

### 4. Implementation (Via Local Issue)

Implementation is invoked via workflow dispatch with a local issue file path. Scheduled workflows may also dispatch implementers based on repository policy.

```bash
# Example: Run implementer with a specific issue
jlo run implementers .jules/exchange/issues/<label>/auth-inconsistency.yml
```

The implementer reads the issue content (embedded in prompt) and produces code changes.
The issue file must exist; missing files fail fast before agent execution.

**Issue Lifecycle**:
1. An issue file is selected from `.jules/exchange/issues/<label>/` on the `jules` branch.
2. The workflow validates the file exists and passes content to the implementer.
3. Issue file retention or deletion is handled by the dispatching workflow policy.
4. The implementer works on the default code branch and creates a PR for human review.
5. The `sync-jules.yml` workflow keeps `jules` in sync with the default branch after merges.

## Observer Continuity

```
Observer creates events in exchange/events/<state>/
       |
       v
Observer updates perspective.yml (goals/rules/ignore/log)
```

## Issue Lifecycle

- Issues are organized by label directories defined by the scaffold.
- Open issues suppress duplicate observations from observers.
- Issue filenames use stable kebab-case identifiers (for example, `auth-inconsistency.yml`).
- Related events are merged into existing issues, not duplicated.

## Branch Naming Convention

All agents must create branches using this format:

```
jules-narrator-<id>
jules-observer-<id>
jules-decider-<id>
jules-planner-<id>
jules-implementer-<id>-<short_description>
```

## Testing and Validation

Workflows validate the exchange with `jlo doctor` after each layer execution to detect structural regressions early.

## Pause/Resume

Set the repository pause variable referenced by the workflows to skip scheduled runs.
The default behavior is active; paused behavior is explicit and visible.

Commit message:

Refactor roles and implement new functionality for decider, planner, … (#489)
* Refactor roles and implement new functionality for decider, planner, implementer, observers, and innovators layers

- Updated role names from plural to singular (deciders -> decider, planners -> planner, implementers -> implementer) in tests and workflows.
- Added new files for decider, implementer, innovators, and observers layers, implementing their respective functionalities.
- Created contracts and prompt templates for decider and implementer layers.
- Implemented task files for various implementer tasks (bugs, docs, feats, refacts, tests).
- Introduced planner layer with functionality to expand issues with deep analysis.
- Enhanced issue execution logic to validate issue paths and dispatch workflows.
- Added multi-role execution utilities for handling role previews and session dispatching.
- Updated scaffold files to include new layer structures and task definitions.

* refactor: remove implementer and planner workflows, update related documentation

* refactor: remove dispatch_workflow method from GitHubPort and related implementations

* refactor: standardize layer names and improve prompt assembly in command execution

* refactor: update single-role layer names for consistency and enhance GitHub command output handling

* init jlo

src/assets/scaffold/jules/README.md, after:

# .jules/

The `.jules/` directory is a structured workspace for scheduled agents and human execution.
It captures **observations as events** and **actionable work as issues** within the exchange.

This file is human-oriented. Agents must read `.jules/JULES.md` for the formal contract.

## Scope (What this README defines)

- `.jules/` defines **artifacts and contracts** (events/issues, role state, schemas).
- **Execution + git + PR operations are out of scope here.**
  When you are reading this inside the VM, you already have the execution environment;
  follow the role contract and produce the required artifacts/changes.
- `jlo` is **scaffold + prompt/config management only**.
  It does **not** run agents, orchestrate schedules, create PRs, or manage merges.

## Document Hierarchy

| Document | Audience | Contains |
|----------|----------|----------|
| `.jules/JULES.md` | Jules agents | Jules-specific contracts and schemas |
| `.jules/README.md` | Humans | This guide |

**Rule**: Jules-internal details stay in `.jules/`.

## Role Flow

```
Narrator -> Observer -> Decider -> [Planner] -> Implementer
(changes)   (events)    (issues)   (expand)     (code changes)
```

| Role Type | Role(s) | Transformation |
|-----------|---------|----------------|
| Narrator | `.jules/roles/narrator/` | Git history -> Changes summary |
| Observer | directories under `.jlo/roles/observers/` | Source -> Events (domain-specialized observations) |
| Decider | `.jules/roles/decider/` | Events -> Issues (validation + consolidation) |
| Planner | (Single-role; no `.jlo/` role definitions) | Issues -> Expanded Issues (deep analysis, optional) |
| Implementer | (Single-role; no `.jlo/` role definitions) | Issues -> Code changes |

**Execution**: Roles are invoked by GitHub Actions using `jlo run` and workflow dispatch workflows.

**Configuration Language**: All YAML files are written in English for optimal LLM processing.

## Branch Strategy

| Agent Type | Starting Branch | Output Branch | Auto-merge |
|------------|-----------------|---------------|------------|
| Narrator | `jules` | `jules-narrator-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Observer | `jules` | `jules-observer-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Decider | `jules` | `jules-decider-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Planner | `jules` | `jules-planner-*` | ✅ (if `.jules/` only) |
| Implementer | `main` | `jules-implementer-*` | ❌ (human review) |

Narrator, Observers, Decider, and Planner modify only `.jules/` and auto-merge after CI passes.
Implementer modifies source code and requires human review.

## Directory Structure

```
.jules/
+-- README.md           # This file (jlo-managed)
+-- JULES.md            # Agent contract (jlo-managed)
+-- .jlo-version        # Version marker (jlo-managed)
+-- github-labels.json  # GitHub labels definition
|
+-- exchange/           # Exchange container
|   +-- changes.yml     # Narrator output (bounded changes summary)
|   +-- events/         # Raw observations
|   |   +-- <state>/
|   |       +-- *.yml
|   +-- issues/         # Consolidated problems
|   |   +-- <label>/
|   +-- innovators/     # Innovator state persistence
|       +-- <persona>/  # Persona-specific workstation
|           +-- perspective.yml   # Innovator continuity
|           +-- proposal.yml      # Current proposal draft
|
+-- workstations/       # Observer state persistence
|   +-- <role>/         # Role-specific workstation
|       +-- perspective.yml   # Observer continuity (goals/rules/ignore/log)
|
+-- roles/              # Role definitions (global)
    +-- narrator/       # Single-role layer
    |   +-- narrator_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Layer contract
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   |   +-- bootstrap_summary.yml
    |   |   +-- overwrite_summary.yml
    |   +-- schemas/
    |       +-- changes.yml   # Schema template for changes.yml
    |
    +-- observers/      # Multi-role layer
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared observer contract
    |   +-- observers_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   |   +-- bridge_comments.yml
    |   +-- schemas/
    |   |   +-- event.yml    # Event template
    |
    +-- decider/       # Single-role layer
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared decider contract
    |   +-- decider_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   +-- schemas/
    |   |   +-- issue.yml    # Issue template
    |
    +-- planner/       # Single-role layer (issue-driven)
    |   +-- planner_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared planner contract
    |   +-- tasks/
    |
    +-- implementer/   # Single-role layer (issue-driven)
    |   +-- implementer_prompt.j2 # Prompt construction rules
    |   +-- contracts.yml    # Shared implementer contract
    |   +-- tasks/
    |   |   +-- bugs.yml
    |   |   +-- docs.yml
    |   |   +-- feats.yml
    |   |   +-- refacts.yml
    |   |   +-- tests.yml
    |
    +-- innovators/     # Multi-role layer (phase-driven)
        +-- innovators_prompt.j2      # Prompt construction (uses {{phase}})
        +-- contracts.yml             # Layer contract
        +-- tasks/
        |   +-- create_idea.yml       # Creation phase task
        |   +-- refine_proposal.yml   # Refinement phase task
        +-- schemas/
        |   +-- perspective.yml
        |   +-- idea.yml
        |   +-- proposal.yml
        |   +-- comment.yml
        +-- roles/
            +-- <persona>/
                +-- role.yml
|
+-- setup/
    +-- tools.yml       # Tool selection
    +-- env.toml        # Environment variables (generated/merged)
    +-- install.sh      # Installation script (generated)
    +-- .gitignore      # Ignores env.toml
```

## Layer Architecture

| Layer | Type | Invocation |
|-------|------|------------|
| Narrator | Single-role | `jlo run narrator` |
| Observers | Multi-role | `jlo run observers --role <role>` |
| Decider | Single-role | `jlo run decider` |
| Planner | Single-role | `jlo run planner <path>` |
| Implementer | Single-role | `jlo run implementer <path>` |

**Narrator**: Produces `.jules/exchange/changes.yml` summarizing recent codebase changes. Runs first, before observers.

**Multi-role layers** (Observers, Innovators): Roles are scheduled via `.jlo/scheduled.toml`. Each role has its own subdirectory with `role.yml` in `.jlo/roles/`. Custom roles are authored with `jlo create <layer> <name>`, while built-in roles are installed with `jlo add <layer> <role>`.

**Single-role layers** (Decider, Planner, Implementer): Have a fixed role with `contracts.yml` directly in the layer directory. Planner and Implementer are issue-driven and require an issue file path argument. Template creation is not supported.

**Innovators**: Phase-driven execution (`--phase creation` or `--phase refinement`). Each phase uses a dedicated task file (`tasks/create_idea.yml` / `tasks/refine_proposal.yml`) injected at runtime via the `task` context variable. Universal constraints are in `contracts.yml`.

## Exchange
 
 The exchange is a flat directory structure for events and issues.
 
 - Events and issues are global to the repository.
 - `roles/` remains global.
 - Observers and Decider operate on the single `exchange/` directory.
 - Event state directories are defined by the scaffold templates.

## Configuration Files

### contracts.yml
Layer-level shared constraints. All roles in the layer reference this file.

### <layer>_prompt.j2
Defines a prompt template that assembles required and optional includes into a single prompt sent to the agent.

### role.yml
Specialized focus for observers and innovators. Continuity lives in the workstation perspective file.

### Templates (*.yml)
Copyable templates (changes.yml, event.yml, issue.yml) defining the structure of artifacts.
Agents `cp` these files and fill them out.

## Workflow

### 0. Narrator Agent (Scheduled, runs first)

Narrator summarizes codebase changes for observer context:
1. Reads `.jules/roles/narrator/schemas/changes.yml` for schema
2. Determines commit range (previous `to_commit` or bootstrap)
3. Collects commits and changed paths (excluding `.jules/`)
4. Writes `.jules/exchange/changes.yml`

If no non-excluded changes exist, Narrator exits without creating a session.

### 1. Observer Agents (Scheduled)

Each observer:
1. Reads contracts.yml (layer behavior)
2. Reads `.jules/exchange/changes.yml` for recent changes context (if present)
3. Reads role.yml (specialized focus)
4. Reads `.jules/workstations/<role>/perspective.yml`
5. **Skips observations already covered by open issues (deduplication)**
6. Writes event files under exchange/events/ in the incoming state directory
7. Updates perspective.yml (goals/rules/ignore/log)
8. Publishes changes as a PR (branch naming follows the convention below)


### 2. Decider Agent (Scheduled)

Triage agent:
1. Reads contracts.yml (layer behavior)
2. Reads all event files in the incoming state directory
3. Validates observations (do they exist in codebase?)
4. Merges related events sharing root cause
5. **Merges events into existing issues when related (updates content)**
6. Creates new issues for genuinely new problems (using id as filename, placing in label directory)
7. **When deep analysis is needed, provides clear rationale in deep_analysis_reason**
8. Moves processed events to the processed state directory defined by the scaffold

**Decider answers**: "Is this real? Should these events merge into one issue?"

### 3. Planner Agent (On-Demand)

Specifier agent (runs only for `requires_deep_analysis: true`):
1. Reads contracts.yml (layer behavior)
2. Reads target issue from exchange/issues/<label>/
3. **Reviews deep_analysis_reason to understand scope**
4. Analyzes full system impact and dependency tree
5. Expands issue with detailed analysis (affected_areas, constraints, risks)
6. Sets requires_deep_analysis to false
7. **Preserves and expands the original rationale with findings**
8. Overwrites the issue file

**Planner answers**: "What is the full scope of this issue?"

### 4. Implementation (Via Local Issue)

Implementation is invoked by running `jlo run implementer` with a local issue file path. Scheduled workflows may also dispatch implementer based on repository policy.

```bash
# Example: Run implementer with a specific issue
jlo run implementer .jules/exchange/issues/<label>/auth-inconsistency.yml
```

The implementer reads the issue content (embedded in prompt) and produces code changes.
The issue file must exist; missing files fail fast before agent execution.

**Issue Lifecycle**:
1. An issue file is selected from `.jules/exchange/issues/<label>/` on the `jules` branch.
2. `jlo run implementer` validates the file exists and passes content to the implementer.
3. `jlo run implementer` deletes the issue file and its source events after dispatching the session.
4. The implementer works on the default code branch and creates a PR for human review.
5. The `sync-jules.yml` workflow keeps `jules` in sync with the default branch after merges.

## Observer Continuity

```
Observer creates events in exchange/events/<state>/
       |
       v
Observer updates perspective.yml (goals/rules/ignore/log)
```

## Issue Lifecycle

- Issues are organized by label directories defined by the scaffold.
- Open issues suppress duplicate observations from observers.
- Issue filenames use stable kebab-case identifiers (for example, `auth-inconsistency.yml`).
- Related events are merged into existing issues, not duplicated.

## Branch Naming Convention

All agents must create branches using this format:

```
jules-narrator-<id>
jules-observer-<id>
jules-decider-<id>
jules-planner-<id>
jules-implementer-<id>-<short_description>
```

## Testing and Validation

Workflows validate the exchange with `jlo doctor` after each layer execution to detect structural regressions early.

## Pause/Resume

Set the repository pause variable referenced by the workflows to skip scheduled runs.
The default behavior is active; paused behavior is explicit and visible.
